Telegram bot for file sharing using Quarkus (#132)
lunatech-labs/lunatech-blog: posts/2023-11-05-telegram-bot-for-file-sharing-using-quarkus.adoc

= Telegram bot for file sharing using Quarkus
iarmush

> v1.0, 2023-11-05

Reviewer: Can you update to 2024 and also update the folder + post file name?

= Telegram bot for file sharing using Quarkus
iarmush
v1.0, 2023-11-05
:title: Telegram bot for file sharing using Quarkus
:imagesdir: ../media/2023-11-05-telegram-bot-for-file-sharing-using-quarkus
:lang: en

> :tags: [java, telegram, quarkus, en]

Reviewer 2: you can remove the tag `en` from here, otherwise it will appear twice

In terms of state diagrams:

image::state_diagram.png[,600]

== Backend
For the backend, we'll be employing a conventional web server. Our journey begins with the https://quarkus.io/get-started/[Quarkus Get Started page].

To get started, we need to follow step 1 on the provided link, which involves installing the Quarkus CLI.

Now, we can execute:
```bash
quarkus --help
```
to get familiar with the main functionality. This command will be our main entry point for any application manipulation. With its assistance we can create a skeleton, in fact, it will have everything that we need, and it will even be a ready-to-deploy application.

Before we create an application we have to choose which extensions (or dependencies) we’re going to use.

We can find them on https://quarkus.io/extensions/ or by executing:
```bash
quarkus extension list
```
For our needs, it will be enough to add `quarkus-mongodb-panache`, `quarkus-resteasy-reactive` and `quarkus-quinoa`.

> Additionally, we have to manually add https://github.com/rubenlagus/TelegramBots - a library for creating telegram bots, and https://github.com/quarkiverse/quarkus-minio - MinIO java client by Quarkus.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, we have to manually add https://github.com/rubenlagus/TelegramBots[TelegramBots] - a library for creating telegram bots, and https://github.com/quarkiverse/quarkus-minio[MinIO]- MinIO java client by Quarkus.
```

While in the root directory of our new project, run this command:
```bash
quarkus create app com.example:file-sharing-bot \
--extension=quarkus-mongodb-panache,quarkus-resteasy,quarkus-quinoa \
--gradle
```

We can already run our application with the default implementation. To do so, navigate to the root directory and execute the command to start our application:
```bash
quarkus dev
```

> Now, you can open the recommended welcome page at http://localhost:8080/

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, you can open the welcome page at http://localhost:8080/
```
I think `recommended` it s bit weird and you already mention `default` several times after

image::welcome_page.png[,600]

and http://localhost:8080/hello default controller method

image::controller_hello.png[,600]

and http://localhost:8080/quinoa.html default frontend implementation

image::quinoa_default.png[,600]

It was quite easy, right?

> Before we dive into coding the bot's logic, we need to register our bot and obtain a username and token. To do this, please follow the official instructions provided here: https://core.telegram.org/bots/tutorial.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before we dive into coding the bot's logic, we need to register our bot and obtain a username and token. To do this, please follow the official instructions provided in this https://core.telegram.org/bots/tutorial[telegram tutorial].
```

import org.telegram.telegrambots.bots.TelegramLongPollingBot;
import org.telegram.telegrambots.meta.TelegramBotsApi;
import org.telegram.telegrambots.meta.exceptions.TelegramApiException;
import org.telegram.telegrambots.updatesreceivers.DefaultBotSession;

@QuarkusMain
public class Main {

    public static void main(String... args) {
        Quarkus.run(MyApp.class, args);
    }

    public static class MyApp implements QuarkusApplication {
        private static final Logger LOGGER = Logger.getLogger(MyApp.class);
        private final TelegramLongPollingBot telegramLongPollingBot;

        public MyApp(TelegramLongPollingBot telegramLongPollingBot) {
            this.telegramLongPollingBot = telegramLongPollingBot;
        }

        @Override
        public int run(String... args) {
            try {
                TelegramBotsApi telegramBotsApi = new TelegramBotsApi(DefaultBotSession.class);
                telegramBotsApi.registerBot(telegramLongPollingBot);
            } catch (TelegramApiException e) {
                LOGGER.errorf(e, e.getMessage());
            }
            Quarkus.waitForExit();
            return 0;
        }
    }
}
----

> Dependency injection in Quarkus is a CDI-based dependency injection - https://quarkus.io/guides/cdi. In the case of only one defined constructor, Quarkus uses constructor injection. To satisfy the MyApp constructor parameter TelegramLongPollingBot, let's create the corresponding bean using the [.yellow]#@Produce# annotation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dependency injection in Quarkus is a https://quarkus.io/guides/cdi[CDI-based dependency injection]. In the case of only one defined constructor, Quarkus uses constructor injection. To satisfy the MyApp constructor parameter TelegramLongPollingBot, let's create the corresponding bean using the [.yellow]#@Produce# annotation.
```

> To satisfy the constructor parameter  of  let's create a corresponding bean using the method return type by [.yellow]#@Produce# annotation:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To satisfy the constructor parameter, let's create a corresponding bean using the [.yellow]#@Produce# annotation:
```
or maybe you forgot a word, after `of`?
Another thing, I find it confusing that you say that the annotation is the method return type. They are different things

[source,java]
----
@MongoEntity(collection = "logData")
public class LogData extends PanacheMongoEntity {

    @NotNull
    @BsonProperty("chatId")
    private Long chatId;

    @NotNull
    @BsonProperty("downloadDate")
    public LocalDateTime downloadDate;
}
----

repository class:
[source,java]
----
@ApplicationScoped
public class LogDataRepository implements PanacheMongoRepository<LogData> {
}
----

And nothing more. Again, yes, it was quite easy.

In the last step, we will use the amazing Quarkus feature - https://quarkus.io/guides/dev-services[Dev Services] to provide https://quarkus.io/guides/dev-services#mongodb[MongoDB] and https://docs.quarkiverse.io/quarkus-minio/dev/index.html#dev-services[MinIO] docker containers.

All we need to do is to add a few properties to `application.properties` file:
[source]
----
quarkus.mongodb.devservices.enabled=true
quarkus.mongodb.devservices.image-name=mongo
quarkus.mongodb.devservices.port=27018

quarkus.minio.devservices.enabled=true
quarkus.minio.devservices.image-name=minio/minio
quarkus.minio.devservices.access-key=testtest
quarkus.minio.devservices.secret-key=testtest
quarkus.minio.devservices.port=9000
----

> After we run our application in dev mode, Quarkus will up the specified containers automatically and create MinioClient with corresponding properties.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After we run our application in dev mode, Quarkus will start the specified containers automatically and create a MinioClient with the corresponding properties.
```

> Well, our backend application is ready to up. Being in the root directory run:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Well, our backend application is ready to start. Being in the root directory run:
```

```bash
quarkus dev
```

== Frontend

> For the frontend application, we will use https://docs.quarkiverse.io/quarkus-quinoa/dev/[Quarkus Quinoa project] using React with TypeScript.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the frontend application, we will use https://docs.quarkiverse.io/quarkus-quinoa/dev/[Quarkus Quinoa project] together with React and TypeScript.
```

> All possible framework combinations you can see on https://docs.quarkiverse.io/quarkus-quinoa/dev/web-frameworks.html[Quarkus Quinoa - Web Frameworks]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can see all possible framework combinations on https://docs.quarkiverse.io/quarkus-quinoa/dev/web-frameworks.html[Quarkus Quinoa - Web Frameworks]
```

> Inside our generated application we can see the directory  `src/main/webui` - it’s the root for our NodeJS application with  a`package.json` file. Let's remove the default implementation by removing the whole directory `src/main/webui`.  Then place yourself in `file-sharing-bot/src/main` and execute:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Inside our generated application we can see the directory  `src/main/webui` - it’s the root for our NodeJS application with a `package.json` file. Let's remove the default implementation by removing the whole directory `src/main/webui`.  Then place yourself in `file-sharing-bot/src/main` and execute:
```

In the directory `src/main/webui` we can see the new generated project.

As usual, let's add `bootstrap`. Being in `/frontend/src/main/webui` execute:
```bash
npm install bootstrap
```

The last thing we need is to change the `webui/src/App.tsx` file. We have to add one button and the function that sends an HTTP request to our backend application when the `onClick()` event is triggered. We will also retrieve the chatId variable from the query parameter:
[source,javascript]
----
import React from 'react';
import logo from './logo.svg';
import './App.css';
import '../node_modules/bootstrap/dist/css/bootstrap.css';

function App() {
  const queryParams = new URLSearchParams(window.location.search);
  const chatId = queryParams.get('chatId');

  function download() {
    window.location.href = `http://127.0.0.1:8091/api/v1/file-sharing-bot/download?chatId=${chatId}`;
  }

  return (
      <div className="App">
        <h1 className="display-1"> Click on the button to download</h1>
        <button className="btn btn-primary" onClick={() => download()}>Download</button>
      </div>
  );
}

export default App;

----

> Yes, hardcode it (3).

Reviewer 2: I think you can just mention that for the sake of code simplicity you hardcoded some values.
Are the enumerations `(1)`, `(2)`, `(3)` suppose to match with something?

Reviewer 2: Yes, you can remove those enumerations. They should match with something, otherwise they are confusing

> And just in case, change the default port for our application by adding the property `quarkus.http.port=8091` to `application.properties`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To avoid port conflicts, change the default port for our application by adding the property `quarkus.http.port=8091` to `application.properties`
```

Now we can build our application with:
```bash
quarkus build
```
and run backend and frontend simultaneously:
```bash
quarkus dev
```

Let's check that our app returns at least something. Open http://localhost:8091/

image::frontend.png[,600]

== User case

What do we have now?

1. Backend application
2. Frontend application
3. MongoDB and MinIO in docker

And so, the final test case.

1) Open the bot.

image::step1.png[,600]
2) Click on the "Start" button, which is sending the `/start` command.

image::step2.png[,600]

3) Send file and photo.

image::step3.png[,600]

4) Send the text command `/link`.

image::step4.png[,600]

5) Copy the URL and open it in the browser.

image::step5.png[,600]

6) Click on the "Download" button, unzip the archive and check its content.

image::step6.png[,600]

7) Connect to MongoDB using a UI client and confirm the presence of downloadable data.

image::step7.png[,600]

> 8) Let’s also check what we have in MinIO. Open the MinIO admin panel (you can find the console admin port by running `docker ps`) and login with user and password values that we specified in `application.properties`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
8) Let’s also check what we have it in MinIO. Open the MinIO admin panel (you can find the console admin port by running `docker ps`) and login with the user and password values that we specified in `application.properties`.
```

image::step8.png[,600]

9) Here we have only one bucket. Open it.

image::step9.png[,600]

10) Here we can see two sent files.

image::step10.png[,600]

> 11) Move back to our bot. And send `/finish` command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
11) Return to our bot and send the `/finish` command.
```

image::step11.png[,600]

> 12) Move again back to MinIO admin panel and check that our bucket is empty.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
12) Go back to the MinIO admin panel and check that our bucket is empty.
```

= Telegram bot for file sharing using Quarkus

> https://github.com/iarmush

Reviewer 2: I don't know what is the exact rule here, or are you trying to achieve, but the idea is to put your github username here and then it will fetch you real name and avatar - meaning just `iarmush`

      <div className="App">
        <h1 className="display-1"> Click on the button to download</h1>
        <button className="btn btn-primary" onClick={() => download()}>Download</button>
      </div>
  );
}

export default App;

----

Yes, hardcode it (3).

And just in case change the default port for our application by adding the property `quarkus.http.port=3006` to `application.properties`

Now we can build our application with:
```bash
quarkus build
```
and run it:
```bash
java -jar build/quarkus-app/quarkus-run.jar
```

Let's check that our app returns at least something. Open http://localhost:3006/

image::frontend.png[,600]

== User case

What do we have now?

1. Backend application
2. Frontend application
3. MongoDB and MinIO in docker

And so, the final test case.

1) Open the bot

image::step1.png[,600]
2) Click on the "Start" button, which is sending the `/start` command.

image::step2.png[,600]

3) Send photo and file

image::step3.png[,600]

4) Send the text command `/link`

image::step4.png[,600]

5) Copy the URL and open it in the browser

image::step5.png[,600]

6) Click on the "Download" button, unzip the archive and check its content

image::step6.png[,600]

> 7) Connect to MongoDB using any UI client and check that we have data about our downloading

Author: :) Fixed to: Connect to MongoDB using a UI client and confirm the presence of downloadable data.

In terms of state diagrams:

image::state_diagram.png[,600]

== Backend
For the backend, we'll be employing a conventional web server. Our journey begins with the https://quarkus.io/get-started/[Quarkus Get Started page].

To get started, we need to follow step 1 on the provided link, which involves installing the Quarkus CLI.

Now, we can execute
```bash
quarkus --help
```
to get familiar with the main functionality. This command will be our main entry point for any application manipulation. With its assistance we can create a skeleton, in fact, it will have everything that we need, and it will even be a ready-to-deploy application.

Before we create an application we have to choose which extensions (or dependencies) we’re going to use.

We can find them on https://quarkus.io/extensions/ or by executing
```bash
quarkus extension list
```
For our needs, it will be enough to add `quarkus-mongodb-panache` and `quarkus-resteasy-reactive`.

Additionally, we have to manually add https://github.com/rubenlagus/TelegramBots - a library for creating telegram bots, and https://github.com/minio/minio-java - MinIO java client.

> While in the root directory of our new project, run this command -

Reviewer 2: Actually I noticed that before other snippets you don't put anything. I usually use a `:` every single time/

import org.telegram.telegrambots.bots.TelegramLongPollingBot;
import org.telegram.telegrambots.meta.TelegramBotsApi;
import org.telegram.telegrambots.meta.exceptions.TelegramApiException;
import org.telegram.telegrambots.updatesreceivers.DefaultBotSession;

@QuarkusMain
public class Main {

    public static void main(String... args) {
        Quarkus.run(MyApp.class, args);
    }

    public static class MyApp implements QuarkusApplication {
        private static final Logger LOGGER = Logger.getLogger(MyApp.class);
        private final TelegramLongPollingBot telegramLongPollingBot;

        public MyApp(TelegramLongPollingBot telegramLongPollingBot) {
            this.telegramLongPollingBot = telegramLongPollingBot;
        }

        @Override
        public int run(String... args) {
            try {
                TelegramBotsApi telegramBotsApi = new TelegramBotsApi(DefaultBotSession.class);
                telegramBotsApi.registerBot(telegramLongPollingBot);
            } catch (TelegramApiException e) {
                LOGGER.errorf(e, e.getMessage());
            }
            Quarkus.waitForExit();
            return 0;
        }
    }
}
----

> Dependency injection in Quarkus is a CDI-based dependency injection - https://quarkus.io/guides/cdi. In the case of only one defined constructor, Quarkus uses constructor injection. To satisfy the constructor parameter let's create a corresponding bean using the method return type by [.yellow]#@Produce# annotation.

Reviewer 2: I think a bit of context of which dependency is going to be injected is missing here, at the beginning of the paragraph

> Dependency injection in Quarkus is a CDI-based dependency injection - https://quarkus.io/guides/cdi. In the case of only one defined constructor, Quarkus uses constructor injection. To satisfy the constructor parameter let's create a corresponding bean using the method return type by [.yellow]#@Produce# annotation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dependency injection in Quarkus is a CDI-based dependency injection - https://quarkus.io/guides/cdi. In the case of only one defined constructor, Quarkus uses constructor injection. To satisfy the constructor parameter let's create the corresponding bean using the [.yellow]#@Produce# annotation.
```

[source,java]
----
    @Produces
    public TelegramLongPollingBot telegramLongPollingBot() {
        return new TelegramLongPollingBot(botConfig.token()) {
            @Override
            public String getBotUsername() {
                return botConfig.username();
            }

            @Override
            public void onUpdateReceived(Update update) {
                try {
                    var message = update.getMessage();
                    if (message.hasText()) {
                        messageService.handleText(message);
                    } else if (message.hasDocument() || message.hasPhoto() || message.hasVideo()) {
                        messageService.handleMedia(message);
                    } else {

>                         execute(SendMessage.builder().text("Please send medias").build());

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                        execute(SendMessage.builder().text("Please send media").build());
```

            fileId = message.getDocument().getFileId();
            filePath = telegramLongPollingBot.execute(new GetFile(fileId)).getFilePath();
        } else if (message.getPhoto() != null) {
            fileName = "photo_" + LocalDateTime.now().format(DateTimeFormatter.ISO_LOCAL_DATE_TIME) + ".jpeg";
            fileId = Collections.max(message.getPhoto(), Comparator.comparing(PhotoSize::getFileSize)).getFileId();
            filePath = telegramLongPollingBot.execute(new GetFile(fileId)).getFilePath();
        } else if (message.getVideo() != null) {
            fileName = message.getVideo().getFileName();
            fileId = message.getVideo().getFileId();
            filePath = telegramLongPollingBot.execute(new GetFile(fileId)).getFilePath();
        } else {
            LOGGER.errorf("Error while handling media in chatId: :s", chatId);
            throw new RuntimeException("Error while handling media in chatId: " + chatId);
        }

        var bytes = telegramLongPollingBot.downloadFileAsStream(filePath).readAllBytes();
        minioService.uploadFile(String.valueOf(chatId), fileName, bytes);
    }
----
Yes, hardcode it (2). Yes, "if" is everywhere (3).

> For interaction with MinIO we have to create a client bean like we already did it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For interaction with MinIO we have to create a client bean like we already did.
```

[source,java]
----
    @Produces
    public MinioClient minioClient() {
        try {
            return MinioClient.builder()
                    .endpoint(
                            minIOConfig.host(),
                            minIOConfig.port(),
                            minIOConfig.useSsl())
                    .credentials(
                            minIOConfig.accessKey(),
                            minIOConfig.secretKey())
                    .build();
        } catch (Exception e) {
            LOGGER.errorf(e, "Error while initializing minioClient");
            throw new RuntimeException(e);
        }
    }
----

MinIO is a high-performance object storage server. MinIO's core concept is a "bucket" identified by a unique bucket ID. All files associated with a bucket are stored kinda together as a group. In our case, we'll use the chat ID as the bucket ID, which is unique for each Telegram user. This way, we can easily retrieve files by specifying the bucket ID and their respective names.

[source,java]
----

>     private byte[] getFileAsBytes(String bucketName, String objectName) {

Reviewer 2: if the `bucketName` is what you  just called of "unique bucket ID" then it would be more clear if in the code you used the variable name `bucketId`

Author: In the java MinIO client library, it's a bucket "name". So, changed it to "name". Thanks!

quarkus.mongodb.database=logData
----

And nothing more. Again, yes, it was quite easy.

We're going to up MongoDB and MinIO using `docker-compose.yml` file.
[source,yaml]
----
version: '3'

services:
  mongo:
    image: mongo
    restart: always
    ports:
      - 27018:27017
    networks:
      - nw

  minio:
    image: minio/minio
    restart: always
    ports:
      - 9000:9000
      - 9001:9001
    volumes:
      - ~/minio/data:/data
    environment:
      - MINIO_ROOT_USER=testtest
      - MINIO_ROOT_PASSWORD=testtest
    command: server /data --console-address ":9001"
    networks:
      - nw

networks:
  nw:
----

After we run docker-compose our backend application is ready to up.
Being in `/backend` directory run
```bash
quarkus dev
```

== Frontend
For the frontend application, we will use https://docs.quarkiverse.io/quarkus-quinoa/dev/[Quarkus Quinoa project] using React with TypeScript.
All possible framework combinations you can see on https://docs.quarkiverse.io/quarkus-quinoa/dev/web-frameworks.html.

Being in the root of our repository execute
```bash
quarkus create app frontend -x=io.quarkiverse.quinoa:quarkus-quinoa --gradle
```

> Inside our generated application we can see the directory  `src/main/webui` - it’s a root for our NodeJS application with `package.json` file. Let's remove the default implementation by removing the whole directory  `src/main/webui` and being in a  `frontend/src` execute

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Inside our generated application we can see the directory  `src/main/webui` - it’s the root for our NodeJS application with  a`package.json` file. Let's remove the default implementation by removing the whole directory `src/main/webui`.  Then place yourself in `frontend/src` and execute
```

```bash
npx create-react-app webui --template typescript
```

> (it requires an already installed `node` and `npx`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(it requires `node` and `npx` to be already installed).
```
Maybe also add links for installation. if needed?

In directory `src/main/webui` we can see the new generated project.

As usual, let's add `bootstrap`. Being in `/frontend/src/main/webui` execute
```bash
npm install bootstrap
```

> The last thing we need is to change the `webui/src/App.tsx` file. We have to add one button and function that sends an HTTP request to our backend application for `onClick()` event. Also we will retrieve the chatId variable from the query parameter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The last thing we need is to change the `webui/src/App.tsx` file. We have to add one button and the function that sends an HTTP request to our backend application when the `onClick()` event is triggered. We will also retrieve the chatId variable from the query parameter.
```

[source,javascript]
----
import React from 'react';
import logo from './logo.svg';
import './App.css';
import '../node_modules/bootstrap/dist/css/bootstrap.css';

function App() {
  const queryParams = new URLSearchParams(window.location.search);
  const chatId = queryParams.get('chatId');

  function download() {
    window.location.href = `http://127.0.0.1:8091/api/v1/file-sharing-bot/download?chatId=${chatId}`;
  }

  return (
      <div className="App">
        <h1 className="display-1"> Click on the button to download</h1>
        <button className="btn btn-primary" onClick={() => download()}>Download</button>
      </div>
  );
}

export default App;

----

Yes, hardcode it (3).

And just in case change the default port for our application by adding the property `quarkus.http.port=3006` to `application.properties`

> Now we can build our application by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we can build our application with
```

```bash
quarkus build
```
and run it
```bash
java -jar build/quarkus-app/quarkus-run.jar
```

Let's check that our app returns at least something. Open http://localhost:3006/

image::frontend.png[,600]

== User case

What do we have now?

1. Backend application
2. Frontend application
3. MongoDB and MinIO in docker

And so, the final test case.

1) Open the bot

image::step1.png[,600]

> 2) Click on "Start" button

Reviewer 2: You mean "Send the /start command", right?

Author: if we open the bot in the first time we will see only the "Start" button, which is sending "/start" command. Changed to "Click on the "Start" button, which is sending the `/start` command."

image::step2.png[,600]

3) Send photo and file

image::step3.png[,600]

4) Send the text command `/link`

image::step4.png[,600]

5) Copy the URL and open it in the browser

image::step5.png[,600]

6) Click on the "Download" button, unzip the archive and check its content

image::step6.png[,600]

7) Connect to MongoDB using any UI client and check that we have data about our downloading

image::step7.png[,600]

8) Let's also check what we have in MinIO. Open the admin panel http://localhost:9001/ and login with user and password values that we specified in docker-compose.

image::step8.png[,600]

9) Here we have only one bucket. Open it.

image::step9.png[,600]

10) Here we can see two sent files.

image::step10.png[,600]

11) Move back to our bot. And send `/finish` command

image::step11.png[,600]

12) Move again back to MinIO admin panel and check that our bucket is empty.

image::step12.png[,600]

13) Bot is ready for the new session.

== Conclusion

> That concludes our project overview. In this project, we've explored Quarkus' capabilities for both backend and frontend development. The backend is connected to a MinIO file storage and a MongoDB, while the frontend is a simple one-page application with literally one button.

Reviewer 2: I would remove the first sentence `That concludes our project overview.`

> Please note that we haven't delved into in-depth reviews, and more importantly, we haven't covered Quarkus' advanced features such as native applications and deployment. Here https://quarkus.io/guides/ you can find lots of interesting guides for further exploration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please note that we haven't delved into in-depth reviews, and more importantly, we haven't covered Quarkus' advanced features such as native applications and deployment. In https://quarkus.io/guides/[Quarkus guides] you can find lots of interesting guides for further exploration.
```
